# VLM Datasets

## 1 Dataset Format and Processing
Given the diversity of multimodal datasets, this version uses the Energon loader to improve data processing performance. It requires datasets to be stored in standard WebDataset format. WebDataset stores data in native file formats (jpg, mp4, etc.), which allows various native multimodal datasets to be converted into WebDataset format with simple compression, and then read by Energon.
Related references:
* Energon: https://nvidia.github.io/Megatron-Energon/
* WebDataset: https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/datasets-webdataset


Two multimodal data formats are primarily supported: VQA and Captioning. The specific data processing workflows are described below:
* VQA format datasets, using the VQA sample provided by Qwen2-VL as an example.
* Captioning format datasets, using the minigpt4_3500 dataset as an example.


### 1.1 VQA Data Format


Samples from https://huggingface.co/datasets/THUDM/CogVLM-SFT-311K

```sh
python /workspace/LoongForge/tools/data_preprocess/convert_to_webdataset.py \
    --output_dir /tmp/mllm/wds \
    --json_file /tmp/mllm/mllm_demo.json \
    --image_dir /tmp/mllm/ \
    --maxcount 10000
```

Description:
* convert_to_webdataset.py extracts each sample from json_file and stores it as an independent JSON file, then compresses it together with the corresponding images from image_dir into $output_dir. Each tar file contains at most maxcount samples.
* When launching training, specify the above WebDataset path /tmp/mllm/wds via the --data-path argument for training data loading.



Execution example:
* After running the above script, processed data archives will be created in the --output_dir directory:


pretrain-0.tar contains the following files, where data files with the same prefix belong to the same sample. For example, 1.jpg and 1.json belong to sample 1.


### 1.2 Captioning Data Format


Prepare the raw dataset
Samples from https://huggingface.co/datasets/THUDM/CogVLM-SFT-311K


```sh
cd /tmp/minigpt4
mkdir wds
tar -cf wds/pretrain.tar samples/
```


Since the original dataset format is already consistent with the tar format generated by the convert_to_webdataset.py tool, you only need to run the compression command without calling the conversion tool separately.


Convert WebDataset format to Megatron-Energon format
```sh
cd wds
energon prepare ./
Select the following values for the displayed options:
> Please enter a desired train/val/test split: 10,0,0
> Do you want to create a dataset.yaml interactively? [Y/n]: Y
> Please enter a number to choose a class: 0
> Please enter a webdataset field name for 'image' : jpg
> Please enter a webdataset field name for 'caption': json[captions][0][content]
Done
```


## 2 Offline Packing Data Processing

See
[Offline Data Packing Guide](./offline_packing/README.md)
